<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			
<h1> <a id="III">CHAPTER III.</a></h1>
<p class="pt1"><i>THE TWO CLASSES</i>.</p>
<p class="pt2">“Two men went up into the temple to
pray.”—L<span class="sc">uke</span> xvii. 10.</p>
<p class="pn">I <span class="sc">now</span> want to speak of two
classes: First, those who do not feel their need of a Saviour who
have not been convinced of sin by the Spirit; and Second, those
who are convinced of sin and cry, “What must I do to be
saved?”</p>
<p class="pn">All inquirers can be ranged under two heads: they
have either the spirit of the Pharisee, or the spirit of the
publican. If a man having the spirit of the Pharisee comes into
an after-meeting, I know of no better portion of Scripture to
meet his case than Romans iii. 10: “As it is written, There is
none righteous, no, not one: there is none that understandeth;
there is none that seeketh after God.” Paul is here speaking of
the natural man. “They are all gone out of the way, they are
together become unprofitable; there is none that doeth good, no,
not one.” And in the 17th verse and those which follow, we have
“And the way of peace have they not known; there is no fear of
God before their eyes. Now we know what things soever the law
saith, it saith to them who are under the law; that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before
God.”</p>
<p class="pn">Then observe the last clause of verse 22: “For
there is no difference; for all have sinned, and come short of
the glory of God.” Not part of the human family—but
<i>all</i>—“have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.”
Another verse which has been very much used to convict men of
their sin is 1 John i. 8: “If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.”</p>
<p class="pn">I remember that on one occasion we were holding
meetings in an eastern city of forty thousand inhabitants; and a
lady came and asked us to pray for her husband, whom she purposed
bringing into the after meeting. I have traveled a good deal and
met many pharisaical men; but this man was so clad in
self-righteousness that you could not get the point of the needle
of conviction in anywhere. I said to his wife: “I am glad to see
your faith; but we cannot get near him; he is the most
self-righteous man I ever saw.” She said: “You must! My heart
will break if these meetings end without his conversion.” She
persisted in bringing him; and I got almost tired of the sight of
him.</p>
<p class="pn">But towards the close of our meetings of thirty
days, he came up to me and put his trembling hand on my shoulder.
The place in which the meetings were held was rather cold, and
there was an adjoining room in which only the gas had been
lighted; and he said to me, “Can’t you come in here for a few
minutes?” I thought that he was shaking from cold, and I did not
particularly wish to go where it was colder. But he said: “I am
the worst man in the State of Vermont. I want you to pray for
me.” I thought he had committed a murder, or some other awful
crime; and I asked: “Is there any one sin that particularly
troubles you?” And he said: “My whole life has been a sin. I have
been a conceited, self-righteous Pharisee. I want you to pray for
me.” He was under deep conviction. Man could not have produced
this result; but the Spirit had. About two o’clock in the morning
light broke in upon his soul: and he went up and down the
business street of the city and told what God had done for him;
and has been a most active Christian ever since.</p>
<p class="pn">There are four other passages in dealing with
inquirers, which were used by Christ Himself. “Verily, verily, I
say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God.”  (John iii. 3.)</p>
<p class="pn">In Luke xiii. 3, we read: “Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish.”</p>
<p class="pn">In Matthew xviii., when the disciples came to Jesus
to know who was to be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven, we
are told that He took a little child and set him in the midst and
said, “Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become
as little children, ye shall not enter the kingdom of heaven” 
(xviii. 1-3).</p>
<p class="pn">There is another important “Except” in Matthew v.
20: “Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter the kingdom
of heaven.”</p>
<p class="pn">A man must be made meet before he will want to go
into the kingdom of God. I would rather go into the kingdom with
the younger brother than stay outside with the elder. Heaven
would be hell to such an one. An elder brother who could not
rejoice at his younger brother’s return would not be “fit” for
the kingdom of God. It is a solemn thing to contemplate; but the
curtain drops and leaves him outside, and the younger brother
within. To him the language of the Saviour under other
circumstances seems appropriate: “Verily I say unto you, That the
publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you” 
(Matt. xxi. 31).</p>
<p class="pn">A lady once came to me and wanted a favor for her
daughter. She said: “You must remember I do not sympathize with
you in your doctrine.” I asked: “What is your trouble?” She said:
“I think your abuse of the elder brother is horrible. I think he
is a noble character.” I said that I was willing to hear her
defend him; but that it was a solemn thing to take up such a
position; and that the elder brother needed to be converted as
much as the younger. When people talk of being moral it is well
to get them to take a good look at the old man pleading with his
boy who would not go in.</p>
<p class="pn">But we will pass on now to the other class with
which we have to deal. It is composed of those who are convinced
of sin and from whom the cry comes as from the Philippian jailer,
“What must I do to be saved?” To those who utter this penitential
cry there is no necessity to administer the law. It is well to
bring them straight to the Scripture: “Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shalt be saved.”  (Acts xvi. 31). Many will meet
you with a scowl and say, “I don’t know what it is to believe;”
and though it is the law of heaven that they must believe, in
order to be saved—yet they ask for something besides that. We are
to tell them what, and where, and how, to believe.</p>
<p class="pn">In John iii. 35 and 36 we read: “The Father loveth
the Son, and hath given all things into His hand. He that
believeth on the Son <span class="sc">hath</span> everlasting
life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but
the wrath of God abideth on him.”</p>
<p class="pn">Now this looks reasonable. Man lost life by
unbelief—by not believing God’s word; and we got life back again
by believing—by taking God at His word. In other words we get up
where Adam fell down. He stumbled and fell over the stone of
unbelief; and we are lifted up and stand upright by believing.
When people say they cannot believe, show them chapter and verse,
and hold them right to this one thing: “Has God ever broken His
promise for these six thousand years?” The devil and men have
been trying all the time and have not succeeded in showing that
He has broken a single promise; and there would be a jubilee in
hell to-day if one word that He has spoken could be broken. If a
man says that he cannot believe it is well to press him on that
one thing.</p>
<p class="pn">I can believe God better to-day than I can my own
heart. “The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked: who can know it?”  (Jer. xxii. 9). I can believe God
better than I can myself. If you want to know the way of Life,
believe that Jesus Christ is a personal Saviour; cut away from
all doctrines and creeds, and come right to the heart of the Son
of God. If you have been feeding on dry doctrine there is not
much growth on that kind of food. Doctrines are to the soul what
the streets which lead to the house of a friend who has invited
me to dinner are to the body. They will lead me there if I take
the right one; but if I remain in the streets my hunger will
never be satisfied. Feeding on doctrines is like trying to live
on dry husks; and lean indeed must the soul remain which partakes
not of the Bread sent down from heaven.</p>
<p class="pn">Some ask: “How am I to get my heart warmed?” It is
by believing. You do not get power to love and serve God until
you believe.</p>
<p class="pn">The apostle John says “If we receive the witness of
men, the witness of God is greater: for this is the witness of
God which He hath testified of His Son. He that believeth on the
Son of God hath the witness in himself: he that believeth not God
hath made Him a liar; because he believeth not the record that
God gave of His Son. And this is the record, that God hath given
to us eternal life, and this life is in His Son. He that hath the
Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of God hath not
life”  (1 John v. 9).</p>
<p class="pn">Human affairs would come to a standstill if we did
not take the testimony of men. How should we get on in the
ordinary intercourse of life, and how would commerce get on, if
we disregarded men’s testimony? Things social and commercial
would come to a dead-lock within forty-eight hours! This is the
drift of the apostle’s argument here. “If we receive the witness
of men, the witness of God is greater.” God has borne witness to
Jesus Christ. And if man can believe his fellow men who are
frequently telling untruths and whom we are constantly finding
unfaithful, why should we not take God at His word and believe
His testimony?</p>
<p class="pn">Faith is a belief in testimony. It is not a leap in
the dark, as some tell us. That would be no faith at all. God
does not ask any man to believe without giving him something to
believe. You might as well ask a man to see without eyes; to hear
without ears; and to walk without feet—as to bid him believe
without giving him something to believe.</p>
<p class="pn">When I started for California I procured a
guide-book. This told me, that after leaving the State of
Illinois, I should cross the Mississippi, and then the Missouri;
get into Nebraska; then over the Rocky Mountains to the Mormon
settlement at Salt Lake City, and by the way of the Sierra Nevada
into San Francisco. I found the guide book all right as I went
along; and I should have been a miserable sceptic if, having
proved it to be correct three-fourths of the way, I had said that
I would not believe it for the remainder of the journey.</p>
<p class="pn">Suppose a man, in directing me to the Post Office,
gives me ten landmarks; and that, in my progress there, I find
nine of them to be as he told me; I should have good reason to
believe that I was coming to the Post Office.</p>
<p class="pn">And if, by believing, I get a new life, and a hope,
a peace, a joy, and a rest to my soul, that I never had before;
if I get self-control, and find that I have a power to resist
evil and to do good, I have pretty good proof that I am in the
right road to the “city which hath foundations, whose builder and
maker is God.” And if things have taken place, and are now taking
place, as recorded in God’s Word, I have good reason to conclude
that what yet remains will be fulfilled. And yet people talk of
doubting. There can be no true faith where there is fear. Faith
is to take God at His word, unconditionally. There cannot be true
peace where there is fear. “Perfect love casteth out fear.” How
wretched a wife would be if she doubted her husband! and how
miserable a mother would feel if after her boy had gone away from
home she had reason, from his neglect, to question that son’s
devotion! True love never has a doubt.</p>
<p class="pn">There are three things indispensable to
faith—knowledge, assent, and appropriation.</p>
<p class="pn">We must know God. “And this is life eternal, that
they might <i>know</i> Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom Thou hast sent”  (John xvii. 3). Then we must not only give
our assent to what we know; but we must lay hold of the truth. If
a man simply give his assent to the plan of salvation, it will
not save him: he must accept Christ as his Saviour. He must
receive and appropriate Him.</p>
<p class="pn">Some say they cannot tell how a man’s life can be
affected by his belief. But let some one cry out that some
building in which we happen to be sitting, is on fire; and see
how soon we should act on our belief and get out. We are all the
time influenced by what we believe. We cannot help it. And let a
man believe the record that God has given of Christ, and it will
very quickly affect his whole life.</p>
<p class="pn">Take John v. 24. There is enough truth in that one
verse for every soul to rest upon for salvation. It does not
admit the shadow of a doubt. “Verily, verily”—which means truly,
truly—“I say unto you, He that heareth My word, and believeth on
Him that sent Me, hath—<i>hath</i>—everlasting life, and shall
not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto
life.”</p>
<p class="pn">Now if a person really hears the word of Jesus and
believes with the heart on God who sent the Son to be the Saviour
of the world, and lays hold of and appropriates this great
salvation, there is no fear of judgment. He will not be looking
forward with dread to the Great White Throne; for we read in 1
John iv. 17: “Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have
boldness in the day of judgment: because as He is, so are we in
this world.”</p>
<p class="pn">If we believe, there is for us no condemnation, no
judgment. That is behind us, and passed; and we shall have
boldness in the day of judgment.</p>
<p class="pn">I remember reading of a man who was on trial for
his life. He had friends with influence; and they procured a
pardon for him from the king on condition that he was to go
through the trial, and be condemned. He went into court with the
pardon in his pocket. The feeling ran very high against him, and
the judge said that the court was shocked that he was so much
unconcerned. But, when the sentence was pronounced, he pulled out
the pardon, presented it, and walked out a free man. He has been
pardoned; and so have we. Then let death come, we have nought to
fear. All the grave-diggers in the world cannot dig a grave large
enough and deep enough to hold eternal life; all the coffin
makers in the world cannot make a coffin large enough and tight
enough to hold eternal life. Death has had his hand on Christ
once, but never again.</p>
<p class="pn">Jesus said: “I am the Resurrection, and the Life:
he that believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live:
and whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die”  (John
xi. 25, 26). And in the Apocalypse we read that the risen Saviour
said to John, “I am He that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I
am alive for evermore”  (Rev i. 18). Death cannot touch Him
again.</p>
<p class="pn">We get life by believing. In fact we get more than
Adam lost; for the redeemed child of God is heir to a richer and
more glorious inheritance than Adam in Paradise could ever have
conceived; yea, and that inheritance endures forever—it is
inalienable.</p>
<p class="pn">I would much rather have my life hid with Christ in
God than have lived in Paradise; for Adam might have sinned and
fallen after being there ten thousand years. But the believer is
safer, if these things become real to him. Let us make them a
fact, and not a fiction. God has said it; and that is enough. Let
us trust Him even where we cannot trace Him. Let the same
confidence animate us that was in little Maggie as related in the
following simple but touching incident which I read in the
<i>Bible Treasury</i>:—</p>
<p class="pn">“I had been absent from home for some days, and was
wondering, as I again draw near the homestead, if my little
Maggie, just able to sit alone, would remember me. To test her
memory, I stationed myself where I could see her, but could not
be seen by her, and called her name in the familiar tone,
‘Maggie!’ She dropped her playthings, glanced around the room,
and then looked down upon her toys. Again I repeated her name,
‘Maggie!’ when she once more surveyed the room; but, not seeing
her <i>father’s</i> face, she looked very sad, and slowly resumed
her employment. Once more I called, ‘Maggie!’ when, dropping her
playthings, and bursting into tears, she stretched out her arms
in the direction whence the sound proceeded, knowing that, though
she could not see him, her father <i>must be there</i>,
<span class="sc">for she knew his voice</span>.”</p>
<p class="pn">Now, we have power to see and to hear, and we have
power to believe. It is all folly for the inquirers to take the
ground that they cannot believe. They can, if they will. But the
trouble with most people is that they have connected <span class="sc">feeling</span> with <span class="sc">believing</span>. Now
Feeling has nothing whatever to do with Believing. The Bible does
not say—He that feeleth, or he that feeleth and believeth, hath
everlasting life. Nothing of the kind. I cannot control my
feelings. If I could, I should never feel ill, or have a headache
or toothache. I should be well all the while. But I can believe
God; and if we get our feet on that rock, let doubts and fears
come and the waves surge around us, the anchor will hold.</p>
<p class="pn">Some people are all the time looking at their
faith. Faith is the hand that takes the blessing. I heard this
illustration of a beggar. Suppose you were to meet a man in the
street whom you had known for years as being accustomed to beg;
and you offered him some money, and he were to say to you: “I
thank you; I don’t want your money: I am not a beggar.” “How is
that?” “Last night a man put a thousand dollars into my hands.”
“He did! How did you know it was good money?” “I took it to the
bank and deposited it and have got a bank book.” “How did you get
this gift?” “I asked for alms; and after the gentleman talked
with me he took out a thousand dollars in money and put it in my
hand.” “How do you know that he put it in the right hand?” “What
do I care about which hand; so that I have got the money.” Many
people are always thinking whether the faith by which they lay
hold of Christ is the right kind—but what is far more essential
is to see that we have the right kind of Christ.</p>
<p class="pn">Faith is the eye of the soul; and who would ever
think of taking out an eye to see if it were the right kind so
long as the sight was perfect? It is not my taste, but it is what
I taste, that satisfies my appetite. So, dear friends, it is
taking God at His Word that is the means of our salvation. The
truth cannot be made too simple.</p>
<p class="pn">There is a man living in the city of New York who
has a home on the Hudson River. His daughter and her family went
to spend the winter with him: and in the course of the season the
scarlet fever broke out. One little girl was put in quarantine,
to be kept separate from the rest. Every morning the old
grandfather used to go and bid his grandchild, “Goodbye,” before
going to his business. On one of these occasions the little thing
took the old man by the hand, and, leading him to a corner of the
room, without saying a word she pointed to the floor where she
had arranged some small crackers so they would spell out,
“Grandpa, I want a box of paints.” He said nothing. On his return
home he hung up his overcoat and went to the room as usual: when
his little grandchild, without looking to see if her wish had
been complied with, took him into the same corner, where he saw
spelled out in the same way, “Grandpa, I thank you for the box of
paints.” The old man would not have missed gratifying the child
for anything. That was faith.</p>
<p class="pn">Faith is taking God at His Word; and those people
who want some token are always getting into trouble. We want to
come to this: G<span class="sc">od says it—let us believe
it</span>.</p>
<p class="pn">But some say, Faith is the gift of God. So is the
air; but you have to breathe it. So is bread; but you have to eat
it. So is water; but you have to drink it. Some are wanting a
miraculous kind of feeling. That is not faith. “Faith cometh by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God”  (Rom. x. 17). That is
whence faith comes. It is not for me to sit down and wait for
faith to come stealing over me with a strange sensation; but it
is for me to take God at His Word. And you cannot believe, unless
you have something to believe. So take the Word as it is written,
and appropriate it, and lay hold of it.</p>
<p class="pn">In John vi. 47, 48 we read: “Verily, verily, I say
unto you, He that believeth on Me hath everlasting life. I am
that Bread of life.” There is the bread right at hand. Partake of
it. I might have thousands of loaves within my home, and as many
hungry men in waiting. They might assent to the fact that the
bread was there; but unless they each took a loaf and commenced
eating, their hunger would not be satisfied. So Christ is the
Bread of heaven; and as the body feeds on natural food, so the
soul must feed on Christ.</p>
<p class="pn">If a drowning man sees a rope thrown out to rescue
him he must lay hold of it; and in order to do so he must let go
everything else. If a man is sick he must take the medicine—for
simply looking at it will not cure him. A knowledge of Christ
will not help the inquirer, unless he believes in Him, and takes
hold of Him, as his only hope. The bitten Israelites might have
believed that the serpent was lifted up; but unless they had
looked they would not have lived  (Num. xxi. 6-9).</p>
<p class="pn">I believe that a certain line of steamers will
convey me across the ocean, because I have tried it: but this
will not help another man who may want to go, unless he acts upon
my knowledge. So a knowledge of Christ does not help us unless we
act upon it. That is what it is to believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ. It is to act on what we believe. As a man steps on board
a steamer to cross the Atlantic, so we must take Christ and make
a commitment of our souls to Him; and He has promised to keep all
who put their trust in Him. To believe on the Lord Jesus Christ,
is simply to take Him at His word.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
