<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Gateway Into the Kingdom.</p>
			</hgroup>
			<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
				<p>‚ÄúExcept a man be born again he cannot enter the kingdom of God.‚Äù</p>
				<cite>John 3:3</cite>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="pn">T<span class="sc">here</span> is no portion of the Word of God, perhaps, with which we are more familiar than this passage. I suppose if I were to ask those in any audience if they believed that Jesus Christ taught the doctrine of the New Birth, nine tenths of them would say: ‚ÄúYes, I believe He did.‚Äù</p>
			<p class="pn">Now if the words of this text are true they embody one of the most solemn questions that can come before us. We can afford to be deceived about many things rather than about this one thing. Christ makes it very plain. He says, ‚ÄúExcept a man be born again, he cannot <em>see</em> the Kingdom of God‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîmuch less inherit it. This doctrine of the New Birth is therefore the foundation of all our hopes for the world to come. It is really the A B C of the Christian religion. My experience has been this‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat if a man is unsound on this doctrine he will be unsound on almost every other fundamental doctrine in the Bible. A true understanding of this subject will help a man to solve a thousand difficulties that he may meet with in the Word of God. Things that before seemed very dark and mysterious will become very plain.</p>
			<p class="pn">The doctrine of the New Birth upsets all false religion‚ÅÝ‚Äîall false views about the Bible and about God. A friend of mine once told me that in one of his after-meetings, a man came to him with a long list of questions written out for him to answer. He said: ‚ÄúIf you can answer these questions satisfactorily, I have made up my mind to be a Christian.‚Äù ‚ÄúDo you not think,‚Äù said my friend, ‚Äúthat you had better come to Christ first? Then you can look into these questions.‚Äù The man thought that perhaps he had better do so. After he had received Christ, he looked again at his list of questions; but then it seemed to him as if they had all been answered. Nicodemus came with his troubled mind, and Christ said to him, ‚ÄúYe must be born again.‚Äù He was treated altogether differently from what he expected; but I venture to say that was the most blessed night in all his life. To be ‚Äúborn again‚Äù is the greatest blessing that will ever come to us in this world.</p>
			<p class="pn">Notice how the Scripture puts it. ‚ÄúExcept a man be born again,‚Äù ‚Äúborn from above,‚Äù<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> ‚Äúborn of the Spirit.‚Äù From amongst a number of other passages where we find this word ‚Äú<span class="sc">except</span>,‚Äù I would just name three. ‚ÄúExcept ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.‚Äù (Luke <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. 3, 5.) ‚ÄúExcept ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.‚Äù (Matthew <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. 3.) ‚ÄúExcept your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.‚Äù (Matthew <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 20.) They all really mean the same thing.</p>
			<p class="pn">I am so thankful that our Lord spoke of the New Birth to this ruler of the Jews, this doctor of the law, rather than to the woman at the well of Samaria, or to Matthew the publican, or to Zaccheus. If He had reserved his teaching on this great matter for these three, or such as these, people would have said: ‚ÄúOh yes, these publicans and harlots need to be converted: but I am an upright man; I do not need to be converted.‚Äù I suppose Nicodemus was one of the best specimens of the people of Jerusalem: there was nothing on record against him.</p>
			<p class="pn">I think it is scarcely necessary for me to prove that we need to be born again before we are meet for heaven. I venture to say that there is no candid man but would say he is not fit for the kingdom of God, until he is born of another Spirit. The Bible teaches us that man by nature is lost and guilty, and our experience confirms this. We know also that the best and holiest man, if he turn away from God, will very soon fall into sin.</p>
			<p class="pn">Now, let me say what Regeneration is not. It is not going to church. Very often I see people, and ask them if they are Christians. ‚ÄúYes, of course I am; at least, I think I am: I go to church every Sunday.‚Äù Ah, but this is not Regeneration. Others say, ‚ÄúI am trying to do what is right‚ÅÝ‚Äîam I not a Christian? Is not that a new birth?‚Äù No. What has that to do with being born again? There is yet another class‚ÅÝ‚Äîthose who have ‚Äúturned over a new leaf,‚Äù and think they are regenerated. No; forming a new resolution is not being born again.</p>
			<p class="pn">Nor will being baptized do you any good. Yet you hear people say, ‚ÄúWhy, I have been baptized; and I was born again when I was baptized.‚Äù They believe that because they were baptized into the church, they were baptized into the Kingdom of God. I tell you that it is utterly impossible. You may be baptized into the church, and yet not be baptized into the Son of God. Baptism is all right in its place. God forbid that I should say anything against it. But if you put that in the place of Regeneration‚ÅÝ‚Äîin the place of the New Birth‚ÅÝ‚Äîit is a terrible mistake. You cannot be baptized into the Kingdom of God. ‚ÄúExcept a man be <span class="sc">born again</span>, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.‚Äù If anyone reading this rests his hopes on anything else‚ÅÝ‚Äîon any other foundation‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI pray that God may sweep it away.</p>
			<p class="pn">Another class say, ‚ÄúI go to the Lord‚Äôs Supper; I partake uniformly of the Sacrament.‚Äù Blessed ordinance! Jesus hath said that as often as ye do it ye commemorate His death. Yet, that is not being ‚Äúborn again;‚Äù that is not passing from death unto life. Jesus says plainly‚ÅÝ‚Äîand so plainly that there need not be any mistake about it‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúExcept a man be born of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.‚Äù What has a sacrament to do with that? What has going to church to do with being born again?</p>
			<p class="pn">Another man comes up and says, ‚ÄúI say my prayers regularly.‚Äù Still I say that is not being born of the Spirit. It is a very solemn question, then, that comes up before us; and oh! that every reader would ask himself earnestly and faithfully: ‚ÄúHave I been born again? Have I been born of the Spirit? Have I passed from death unto life?‚Äù</p>
			<p class="pn">There is a class of men who say that special religious meetings are very good for a certain class of people. They would be very good if you could get the drunkard there, or get the gambler there, or get other vicious people there‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat would do a great deal of good. But ‚Äúwe do not need to be converted.‚Äù To whom did Christ utter these words of wisdom? To Nicodemus. Who was Nicodemus? Was he a drunkard, a gambler, or a thief? No! No doubt he was one of the very best men in Jerusalem. He was an honorable Councillor; he belonged to the Sanhedrim; he held a very high position; he was an orthodox man; he was one of the very soundest men. And yet what did Christ say to him? ‚ÄúExcept a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.‚Äù</p>
			<p class="pn">But I can imagine someone saying, ‚ÄúWhat am I to do? I cannot create life. I certainly cannot save myself.‚Äù You certainly cannot; and we do not claim that you can. We tell you it is utterly impossible to make a man better without Christ; but that is what men are trying to do. They are trying to patch up this ‚Äúold Adam‚Äù nature. T<span class="sc">here must be a new creation</span>. Regeneration is a new creation; and if it is a new creation it must be the work of God. In the first chapter of Genesis man does not appear. There is no one there but God. Man is not there to take part. When God created the earth He was alone. When Christ redeemed the world He was alone.</p>
			<p class="pn">‚ÄúThat which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.‚Äù (John <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 6.) The Ethiopian cannot change his skin, and the leopard cannot change his spots. You might as well try to make yourselves pure and holy without the help of God. It would be just as easy for you to do that as for the black man to wash himself white. A man might just as well try to leap over the moon as to serve God in the flesh. Therefore, ‚Äúthat which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.‚Äù</p>
			<p class="pn">Now God tells us in this chapter how we are to get into His kingdom. We are not to work our way in‚ÅÝ‚Äînot but that salvation is worth working for. We admit all that. If there were rivers and mountains in the way, it would be well worth while to swim those rivers, and climb those mountains. There is no doubt that salvation is worth all that effort; but we do not obtain it by our works. It is ‚Äúto him that worketh not, but believeth‚Äù (Romans <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 5). We work because we are saved; we do not work to be saved. We work from the cross; but not towards it. It is written, ‚ÄúWork out your own salvation with fear and trembling‚Äù (Philippians <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 12). Why, you must have your salvation before you can work it out. Suppose I say to my little boy, ‚ÄúI want you to spend that hundred dollars carefully.‚Äù ‚ÄúWell,‚Äù he says, ‚Äúlet me have the hundred dollars; and I will be careful how I spend it.‚Äù I remember when I first left home and went to Boston; I had spent all my money, and I went to the post-office three times a day. I knew there was only one mail a day from home; but I thought by some possibility there might be a letter for me. At last I received a letter from my little sister; and oh, how glad I was to get it. She had heard that there were a great many pickpockets in Boston, and a large part of that letter was to urge me to be very careful not to let anybody pick my pocket. Now I required to have something in my pocket before I could have it picked. So you must have salvation before you can work it out.</p>
			<p class="pn">When Christ cried out on Calvary, ‚ÄúIt is finished!‚Äù He meant what He said. All that men have to do now is just to accept of the work of Jesus Christ. There is no hope for man or woman so long as they are trying to work out salvation for themselves. I can imagine there are some people who will say, as Nicodemus possibly did, ‚ÄúThis is a very mysterious thing.‚Äù I see the scowl on that Pharisee‚Äôs brow as he says, ‚ÄúHow can these things be?‚Äù It sounds very strange to his ear. ‚ÄúBorn again; born of the Spirit! How can these things be?‚Äù A great many people say, ‚ÄúYou must reason it out; but if you do not reason it out, do not ask us to believe it.‚Äù I can imagine a great many people saying that. When you ask me to reason it out, I tell you frankly I cannot do it. ‚ÄúThe wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit.‚Äù (John 8.) I do not understand everything about the wind. You ask me to reason it out. I cannot. It may blow due north here, and a hundred miles away due south. I may go up a few hundred feet, and find it blowing in an entirely opposite direction from what it is down here. You ask me to explain these currents of wind; but suppose that, because I cannot explain them, and do not understand them, I were to take my stand and assert, ‚ÄúOh, there is no such thing as wind.‚Äù I can imagine some little girl saying, ‚ÄúI know more about it than that man does; often have I heard the wind, and felt it blowing against my face;‚Äù and she might say, ‚ÄúDid not the wind blow my umbrella out of my hands the other day? and did I not see it blow a man‚Äôs hat off in the street? Have I not seen it blow the trees in the forest, and the growing corn in the country?‚Äù</p>
			<p class="pn">You might just as well tell me that there is no such thing as wind, as tell me there is no such thing as a man being born of the Spirit. I have felt the spirit of God working in my heart, just as really and as truly as I have felt the wind blowing in my face. I cannot reason it out. There are a great many things I cannot reason out, but which I believe. I never could reason out the creation. I can see the world, but I cannot tell how God made it out of nothing. But almost every man will admit there was a creative power.</p>
			<p class="pn">There are a great many things that I cannot explain and cannot reason out, and yet that I believe. I heard a commercial traveler say that he had heard that the ministry and religion of Jesus Christ were matters of revelation and not of investigation. ‚ÄúWhen it pleased God to reveal His Son in Me,‚Äù says Paul (Galatians <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 15, 16). There was a party of young men together, going up the country; and on their journey they made up their minds not to believe anything they could not reason out. An old man heard them; and presently he said, ‚ÄúI heard you say you would not believe anything you could not reason out.‚Äù ‚ÄúYes,‚Äù they said, ‚Äúthat is so.‚Äù ‚ÄúWell,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúcoming down on the train today, I noticed some geese, some sheep, some swine, and some cattle all eating grass. Can you tell me by what process that same grass was turned into hair, feathers, bristles and wool? Do you believe it is a fact?‚Äù ‚ÄúOh yes,‚Äù they said, ‚Äúwe cannot help believing that, though we fail to understand it.‚Äù ‚ÄúWell,‚Äù said the old man, ‚ÄúI cannot help believing in Jesus Christ.‚Äù And I cannot help believing in the regeneration of man, when I see men who have been reclaimed, when I see men who have been reformed. Have not some of the very worst men been regenerated‚ÅÝ‚Äîbeen picked up out of the pit, and had their feet set upon the Rock, and a new song put in their mouths? Their tongues were cursing and blaspheming; and now are occupied in praising God. Old things have passed away, and all things have become new. They are not reformed only, but <span class="sc">regenerated</span>‚ÅÝ‚Äînew men in Christ Jesus.</p>
			<p class="pn">Down there in the dark alleys of one of our great cities is a poor drunkard. I think if you want to get near hell, you should go to a poor drunkard‚Äôs home. Go to the house of that poor miserable drunkard. Is there anything more like hell on earth? See the want and distress that reign there. But hark! A footstep is heard at the door, and the children run and hide themselves. The patient wife waits to meet the man. He has been her torment. Many a time she has borne about the marks of his blows for weeks. Many a time that strong right hand has been brought down on her defenseless head. And now she waits expecting to hear his oaths and suffer his brutal treatment. He comes in and says to her: ‚ÄúI have been to the meeting; and I heard there that if I will I can be converted. I believe that God is able to save me.‚Äù Go down to that house again in a few weeks: and what a change! As you approach you hear someone singing. It is not the song of a reveller, but the strains of that good old hymn, ‚ÄúRock of Ages.‚Äù The children are no longer afraid of the man, but cluster around his knee. His wife is near him, her face lit up with a happy glow. Is not that a picture of Regeneration? I can take you to many such homes, made happy by the regenerating power of the religion of Christ. What men want is the power to overcome temptation, the power to lead a right life.</p>
			<p class="pn">The only way to get into the kingdom of God is to be ‚Äúborn‚Äù into it. The law of this country requires that the President should be born in the country. When foreigners come to our shores they have no right to complain against such a law, which forbids them from ever becoming Presidents. Now, has not God a right to make a law that all those who become heirs of eternal life must be ‚Äúborn‚Äù into His kingdom?</p>
			<p class="pn">An unregenerated man would rather be in hell than in heaven. Take a man whose heart is full of corruption and wickedness, and place him in heaven among the pure, the holy and the redeemed; and he would not want to stay there. Certainly, if we are to be happy in heaven we must begin to make a heaven here on earth. Heaven is a prepared place for a prepared people. If a gambler or a blasphemer were taken out of the streets of New York and placed on the crystal pavement of heaven and under the shadow of the tree of life, he would say, ‚ÄúI do not want to stay here.‚Äù If men were taken to heaven just as they are by nature, without having their hearts regenerated, there would be another rebellion in heaven. Heaven is filled with a company of those who have been <span class="sc">twice born</span>.</p>
			<p class="pn">In the 14th and 15th verses of this chapter we read ‚ÄúAs Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up; that <span class="sc">whosoever</span> believeth in Him should not perish, but have eternal life.‚Äù ‚ÄúWHOSOEVER.‚Äù Mark that! Let me tell you who are unsaved what God has done for you. He has done everything that He could do toward your salvation. You need not wait for God to do anything more. In one place he asks the question, what more could he have done (Isaiah <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 4). He sent His prophets, and they killed them; then He sent His beloved Son, and they murdered Him. Now He has sent the Holy Spirit to convince us of sin, and to show how we are to be saved.</p>
			<p class="pn">In this chapter we are told how men are to be saved, namely, by Him who was lifted up on the cross. Just as Moses lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up, ‚Äúthat whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have eternal life.‚Äù Some men complain and say that it is very unreasonable that they should be held responsible for the sin of a man six thousand years ago. It was not long ago that a man was talking to me about this injustice, as he called it. If a man thinks he is going to answer God in that way, I tell you it will not do him any good. If you are lost, it will not be on account of Adam‚Äôs sin.</p>
			<p class="pn">Let me illustrate this; and perhaps you will be better able to understand it. Suppose I am dying of consumption, which I inherited from my father or mother. I did not get the disease by any fault of my own, by any neglect of my health; I inherited it, let us suppose. A friend happens to come along: he looks at me, and says: ‚ÄúMoody, you are in a consumption.‚Äù I reply, ‚ÄúI know it very well; I do not want anyone to tell me that.‚Äù ‚ÄúBut,‚Äù he says, ‚Äúthere is a remedy.‚Äù ‚ÄúBut, sir, I do not believe it. I have tried the leading physicians in this country and in Europe; and they tell me there is no hope.‚Äù ‚ÄúBut you know me, Moody; you have known me for years.‚Äù ‚ÄúYes, sir.‚Äù ‚ÄúDo you think, then, I would tell you a falsehood?‚Äù ‚ÄúNo.‚Äù ‚ÄúWell, ten years ago I was as far gone. I was given up by the physicians to die; but I took this medicine and it cured me. I am perfectly well: look at me.‚Äù I say that it is ‚Äúa very strange case.‚Äù ‚ÄúYes, it may be strange; but it is a fact. This medicine cured me: take this medicine, and it will cure you. Although it has cost me a great deal, it shall not cost you anything. Do not make light of it, I beg of you.‚Äù ‚ÄúWell,‚Äù I say, ‚ÄúI should like to believe you; but this is contrary to my reason.‚Äù</p>
			<p class="pn">Hearing this, my friend goes away and returns with another friend, and that one testifies to the same thing. I am still disbelieving; so he goes away, and brings in another friend, and another, and another, and another; and they all testify to the same thing. They say they were as bad as myself; that they took the same medicine that has been offered to me; and that it has cured them. My friend then hands me the medicine. I dash it to the ground; I do not believe in its saving power; I die. The reason is then that I spurned the remedy. So, if you perish, it will not be because Adam fell; but because you spurned the remedy offered to save you. You will choose darkness rather than light. ‚ÄúHow then shall ye escape, if ye neglect so great salvation?‚Äù There is no hope for you if you neglect the remedy. It does no good to look at the wound. If we had been in the Israelitish camp and had been bitten by one of the fiery serpents, it would have done us no good to look at the wound. Looking at the wound will never save anyone. What you must do is to look at the Remedy‚ÅÝ‚Äîlook away to Him who hath power to save you from your sin.</p>
			<p class="pn">Behold the camp of the Israelites; look at the scene that is pictured to your eyes! Many are dying because they neglect the remedy that is offered. In that arid desert is many a short and tiny grave; many a child has been bitten by the fiery serpents. Fathers and mothers are bearing away their children. Over yonder they are just burying a mother; a loved mother is about to be laid in the earth. All the family, weeping, gather around the beloved form. You hear the mournful cries; you see the bitter tears. The father is being borne away to his last resting place. There is wailing going up all over the camp. Tears are pouring down for thousands who have passed away; thousands more are dying; and the plague is raging from one end of the camp to the other.</p>
			<p class="pn">I see in one tent an Israelitish mother bending over the form of a beloved boy just coming into the bloom of life, just budding into manhood. She is wiping away the sweat of death that is gathering upon his brow. Yet a little while, and his eyes are fixed and glassy, for life is ebbing fast away. The mother‚Äôs heartstrings are torn and bleeding. All at once she hears a noise in the camp. A great shout goes up. What does it mean? She goes to the door of the tent. ‚ÄúWhat is the noise in the camp?‚Äù she asks those passing by. And someone says: ‚ÄúWhy, my good woman, have you not heard the good news that has come into the camp?‚Äù ‚ÄúNo,‚Äù says the woman, ‚ÄúGood news! What is it?‚Äù ‚ÄúWhy, have you not heard about it? God has provided a remedy.‚Äù ‚ÄúWhat! for the bitten Israelites? Oh, tell me what the remedy is!‚Äù ‚ÄúWhy, God has instructed Moses to make a brazen serpent, and to put it on a pole in the middle of the camp; and He has declared that whosoever looks upon it shall live. The shout that you hear is the shout of the people when they see the serpent lifted up.‚Äù The mother goes back into the tent, and she says: ‚ÄúMy boy, I have good news to tell you. You need not die! My boy, my boy, I have come with good tidings; you can live!‚Äù He is already getting stupefied; he is so weak he cannot walk to the door of the tent. She puts her strong arms under him and lifts him up. ‚ÄúLook yonder; look right there under the hill!‚Äù But the boy does not see anything; he says‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúI do not see anything; what is it, mother?‚Äù And she says: ‚ÄúKeep looking, and you will see it.‚Äù At last he catches a glimpse of the glistening serpent; and lo, he is well! And thus it is with many a young convert. Some men say, ‚ÄúOh, we do not believe in sudden conversions.‚Äù How long did it take to cure that boy? How long did it take to cure those serpent-bitten Israelites? It was just a look; and they were well.</p>
			<p class="pn">That Hebrew boy is a young convert. I can fancy that I see him now calling on all those who were with him to praise God. He sees another young man bitten as he was; and he runs up to him and tells him, ‚ÄúYou, need not die.‚Äù ‚ÄúOh,‚Äù the young man replies, ‚ÄúI cannot live; it is not possible. There is not a physician in Israel who can cure me.‚Äù He does not know that he need not die. ‚ÄúWhy, have you not heard the news? God has provided a remedy.‚Äù ‚ÄúWhat remedy?‚Äù ‚ÄúWhy, God has told Moses to lift up a brazen serpent, and has said that none of those who look upon that serpent shall die.‚Äù I can just imagine the young man. He may be what you call an intellectual young man. He says to the young convert ‚ÄúYou do not think I am going to believe anything like that? If the physicians in Israel cannot cure me, how do you think that an old brass serpent on a pole is going to cure me?‚Äù ‚ÄúWhy, sir, I was as bad as yourself!‚Äù ‚ÄúYou do not say so!‚Äù ‚ÄúYes, I do.‚Äù ‚ÄúThat is the most astonishing thing I ever heard,‚Äù says the young man: ‚ÄúI wish you would explain the philosophy of it.‚Äù ‚ÄúI cannot. I only know that I looked at that serpent, and I was cured: that did it. I just looked; that is all. My mother told me the reports that were being heard through the camp; and I just believed what my mother said, and I am perfectly well.‚Äù ‚ÄúWell, I do not believe you were bitten as badly as I have been.‚Äù The young man pulls up his sleeve. ‚ÄúLook there! That mark shows where I was bitten; and I tell you I was worse than you are.‚Äù ‚ÄúWell, if I understood the philosophy of it I would look and get well.‚Äù ‚ÄúLet your philosophy go: <em>look and live</em>.‚Äù ‚ÄúBut, sir, you ask me to do an unreasonable thing. If God had said, Take the brass and rub it into the wound, there might be something in the brass that would cure the bite. Young man, explain the philosophy of it.‚Äù I have often seen people before me who have talked in that way. But the young man calls in another, and takes him into the tent, and says: ‚ÄúJust tell him how the Lord saved you;‚Äù and he tells just the same story; and he calls in others, and they all say the same thing.</p>
			<p class="pn">The young man says it is a very strange thing. ‚ÄúIf the Lord had told Moses to go and get some herbs, or roots, and stew them, and take the decoction as a medicine, there would be something in that. But it is so contrary to nature to do such a thing as look at the serpent, that I cannot do it.‚Äù At length his mother, who has been out in the camp, comes in, and she says, ‚ÄúMy boy, I have just the best news in the world for you. I was in the camp, and I saw hundreds who were very far gone, and they are all perfectly well now.‚Äù The young man says: ‚ÄúI should like to get well; it is a very painful thought to die; I want to go into the promised land, and it is terrible to die here in this wilderness; but the fact is‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI do not understand the remedy. It does not appeal to my reason. I cannot believe that I can get well in a moment.‚Äù And the young man dies in consequence of his own unbelief.</p>
			<p class="pn">God provided a remedy for this bitten Israelite‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúLook and live!‚Äù And there is eternal life for every poor sinner, Look, and you can be saved, my reader, this very hour. God has provided a remedy; and it is offered to all. The trouble is, a great many people are looking at the pole. Do not look at the pole; that is the church. You need not look at the church; the church is all right, but the church cannot save you. Look beyond the pole. Look at the Crucified One. Look to Calvary. Bear in mind, sinner, that Jesus died for all. You need not look at ministers; they are just God‚Äôs chosen instruments to hold up the Remedy, to hold up Christ. And so, my friends, take your eyes off from men; take your eyes off from the church. Lift them up to Jesus; who took away the sin of the world, and there will be life for you from this hour.</p>
			<p class="pn">Thank God, we do not require an education to teach us how to look. That little girl, that little boy, only four years old, who cannot read, can look. When the father is coming home, the mother says to her little boy, ‚ÄúLook! look! look!‚Äù and the little child learns to look long before he is a year old. And that is the way to be saved. It is to look at the Lamb of God ‚Äúwho taketh away the sin of the world;‚Äù and there is life this moment for everyone who is willing to look.</p>
			<p class="pn">Some men say, ‚ÄúI wish I knew how to be saved.‚Äù Just take God at His word and trust His Son this very day‚ÅÝ‚Äîthis very hour‚ÅÝ‚Äîthis very moment. He will save you, if you will trust Him. I imagine I hear someone saying, ‚ÄúI do not feel the bite as much as I wish I did. I know I am a sinner, and all that; but I do not feel the bite enough.‚Äù How much does God want you to feel it?</p>
			<p class="pn">When I was in Belfast I knew a doctor who had a friend, a leading surgeon there; and he told me that the surgeon‚Äôs custom was, before performing any operation, to say to the patient, ‚ÄúTake a good look at the wound, and then fix your eyes on me; and do not take them off till I get through.‚Äù I thought at the time that was a good illustration. Sinner, take a good look at your wound; and then fix your eyes on Christ, and do not take them off. It is better to look at the Remedy than at the wound. See what a poor wretched sinner you are; and then look at the Lamb of God who ‚Äútaketh away the sin of the world.‚Äù He died for the ungodly and the sinner. Say ‚ÄúI will take Him!‚Äù And may God help you to lift your eye to the Man on Calvary. And as the Israelites looked upon the serpent and were healed, so may you look and live.</p>
			<p class="pn">After the battle of Pittsburgh Landing I was in a hospital at Murfreesbro. In the middle of the night I was aroused and told that a man in one of the wards wanted to see me. I went to him and he called me ‚Äúchaplain‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI was not the chaplain‚ÅÝ‚Äîand said he wanted me to help him die. And I said, ‚ÄúI would take you right up in my arms and carry you into the kingdom of God if I could; but I cannot do it: I cannot help you die!‚Äù And he said, ‚ÄúWho can?‚Äù I said, ‚ÄúThe Lord Jesus Christ can‚ÅÝ‚ÄîHe came for that purpose.‚Äù He shook his head, and said, ‚ÄúHe cannot save me; I have sinned all my life.‚Äù And I said, ‚ÄúBut He came to save sinners.‚Äù I thought of his mother in the north, and I was sure that she was anxious that he should die in peace; so I resolved I would stay with him. I prayed two or three times, and repeated all the promises I could; for it was evident that in a few hours he would be gone. I said I wanted to read him a conversation that Christ had with a man who was anxious about his soul. I turned to the third chapter of John. His eyes were riveted on me; and when I came to the 14th and 15th verses‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe passage before us‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe caught up the words, ‚ÄúAs Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up; that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have eternal life.‚Äù He stopped me and said, ‚ÄúIs that there?‚Äù I said ‚ÄúYes.‚Äù He asked me to read it again; and I did so. He leant his elbows on the cot and clasping his hands together, said, ‚ÄúThat‚Äôs good; won‚Äôt you read it again?‚Äù I read it the third time; and then went on with the rest of the chapter. When I had finished, his eyes were closed, his hands were folded, and there was a smile on his face. Oh, how it was lit up! What change had come over it! I saw his lips quivering, and leaning over him I heard in a faint whisper, ‚ÄúAs Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up; that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have eternal life.‚Äù He opened his eyes and said, ‚ÄúThat‚Äôs enough; don‚Äôt read any more.‚Äù He lingered a few hours, pillowing his head on those two verses; and then went up in one of Christ‚Äôs chariots, to take his seat in the kingdom of God.</p>
			<p class="pn">Christ said to Nicodemus: ‚ÄúExcept a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.‚Äù You may see many countries; but there is one country‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe land of Beulah, which John Bunyan saw in vision‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou shall never behold, unless you are born again‚ÅÝ‚Äîregenerated by Christ. You can look abroad and see many beautiful trees; but the tree of life, you shall never behold, unless your eyes are made clear by faith in the Saviour. You may see the beautiful rivers of the earth‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou may ride upon their bosoms; but bear in mind that your eye will never rest upon the river which bursts out from the Throne of God and flows through the upper Kingdom, unless you are born again. God has said it; and not man. You will never see the kingdom of God except you are born again. You may see the kings and lords of the earth; but the King of kings and Lord of lords you will never see except you are born again. When you are in London you may go to the Tower and see the crown of England, which is worth thousands of dollars, and is guarded there by soldiers; but bear in mind that your eye will never rest upon the crown of life except you are born again.</p>
			<p class="pn">You may hear the songs of Zion which are sung here; but one song‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat of Moses and the Lamb‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe uncircumcised ear shall never hear; its melody will only gladden the ear of those who have been born again. You may look upon the beautiful mansions of earth, but bear in mind the mansions which Christ has gone to prepare you shall never see unless you are born again. It is God who says it. You may see ten thousand beautiful things in this world; but the city that Abraham caught a glimpse of‚ÅÝ‚Äîand from that time became a pilgrim and sojourner‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou shall never see unless you are born again (Hebrews <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. 8, 10‚ÅÝ‚Äì‚ÅÝ16). You may often be invited to marriage feasts here; but you will never attend the marriage supper of the Lamb except you are born again. It is God who says it, dear friend. You may be looking on the face of your sainted mother tonight, and feel that she is praying for you; but the time will come when you shall never see her more unless you are born again.</p>
			<p class="pn">The reader may be a young man or a young lady who has recently stood by the bedside of a dying mother; and she may have said, ‚ÄúBe sure and meet me in heaven,‚Äù and you made the promise. Ah! you shall never see her more, except you are born again. I believe Jesus of Nazareth, sooner than those infidels who say you do not need to be born again. Parents, if you hope to see your children who have gone before, you must be born of the Spirit. Possibly you are a father or a mother who has recently borne a loved one to the grave; and how dark your home seems! Never more will you see your child, unless you are born again. If you wish to be reunited to your loved one, you must be born again. I may be addressing a father or a mother who has a loved one up yonder. If you could hear that loved one‚Äôs voice, it would say, ‚ÄúCome this way.‚Äù Have you a sainted friend up yonder? Young man or young lady, have you not a mother in the world of light? If you could hear her speak, would not she say, ‚ÄúCome this way, my son,‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúCome this way, my daughter?‚Äù If you would ever see her more you must be born again.</p>
			<p class="pn">We all have an Elder Brother there. Nearly nineteen hundred years ago He crossed over, and from the heavenly shores He is calling you to heaven. Let us turn our backs upon the world. Let us give a deaf ear to the world. Let us look to Jesus on the Cross and be saved. Then we shall one day see the King in His beauty, and we shall go no more out.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
